The purpose of EDM is to ensure the protection and sustainment of services and assets
that are dependent on the actions of external entities. 
External dependencies and supply chain concerns are not new. Recently, however, advances in information
and communications technology (ICT) have made it possible for businesses to realize great efficiency gains,
cost savings, and flexibility. At the same time, global competitive pressures have driven organizations to take
advantage of these gains through automation and outsourcing. These trends have sometimes outpaced
organizations’ ability to manage the resulting risks, making it a growing priority to establish and manage
appropriate controls to ensure the delivery of critical services dependent on the actions of external entities.
The risk introduced by external dependency is one of the more challenging areas to manage because
organizations have a limited ability to directly monitor and control the vulnerabilities and threats introduced.
Ensuring that external entities are meeting the risk objectives of an organization, across the full range of
resiliency management capabilities, is a broad scope to address. Moreover, managing the overall
organization’s operational risk profile when both the management and status of key external dependencies is
uncertain is a challenge that has become one of the top priorities for organizations, governments, and
regulators.
Like any organization, the external entities that the organization depends on may be susceptible to a diverse
and dynamic array of threats, which can negatively affect the dependent organization’s people, information,
technology, and facility assets and consequently the organization’s ability to meet its objectives . The
key challenge for many organizations is their limited ability to ensure the resilience of the external entities they
rely on. 
External suppliers or entities supporting organizations fall into three general relationship categories:
Vendor—Entities are chosen by the organization and are typically governed by negotiated agreements. Examples include
providers of raw materials, labor, consulting, maintenance, hardware/software, and facilities.
Shared infrastructure—The supplier provides its services to a region or group. Agreements are usually standardized and
are virtually the same across the customer base. Examples include power, water, and telecommunications.
Public—Typically these relationships are with a government entity such as a state, local, or federal agency and are not
governed by a contract or agreement. Examples include security services (fire, police) and transportation networks.

Monitoring, governing, and correcting supplier performance are essential activities. As with all aspects of
dependency management the approach must be risk-based, reflecting the supplier’s importance and the
potential impact of its failure to meet the organization’s requirements. When appropriate, the organization may
take corrective actions such as imposing fines, transitioning to another vendor, or bringing the activity back
into the organization. The organization might also mitigate risk through other means, such as adding suppliers
or strengthening its service continuity and incident management plans. 
