Disruptions to an organization’s operations may occur regularly and can scale from so small that the impact is
essentially negligible to so large that they could prevent an organization from achieving its mission
The required responses to these disruptive events must scale similarly. Some events may not require a
formal response by the organization and can be effectively ignored or handled at the individual level following
standard operating procedures. For example, a workstation may lock up, preventing the processing of new
orders. Addressing this interruption may only require the individual workstation owner to perform a simple
reboot. Once the workstation reboots, orders can be processed again. The event required a response, but that
response was carried out by a single individual. Other disruptive events require the entire organization to
mobilize resources. Examples of events whose management may require significant resource investment
include natural disasters, loss of a primary data center, a cyber attack that disrupts critical organizational
infrastructure, or any event that affects the organization’s ability to deliver critical services. 

The process of detecting, analyzing, responding to, and improving from disruptive events is known as incident
management. The goal of incident management is to mitigate the impact of a disruptive event. To accomplish
this goal, an organization establishes processes that
• detect and identify events
• triage and analyze events to determine whether an incident is underway
• respond and recover from an incident
• improve the organization’s capabilities for responding to a future incident 

An event is one or more occurrences that affect an organization’s assets and have the potential to disrupt its
operations
 An effective incident management process requires that an organization monitor and identify
events as they occur. Many units in an organization can perform this activity, but it is often the responsibility 

of a help desk or network operations center. The optimal implementation of the event detection activities
depends heavily on the organizational structure and the scope of the larger incident management process. For
example, a smaller organization may not have a formal help desk or network operations center. Those
organizations may assign event detection responsibilities to specific information technology staff or outsource
event detection responsibilities to a third-party provider. No matter the specific implementation, all
organizations should have capabilities to detect, report, log, track, collect, and store event evidence. The
inability to identify events in a timely manner can significantly increase the organization’s recovery costs and
effort.
Important activities in event detection include
• event detection and reporting
• logging of event data in an incident database or similar mechanism
• event status tracking
• handling of event data in accordance with laws, rules, regulations, policies, etc.




An incident is a high-magnitude event or series of events that significantly affects organizational assets and
requires the organization to respond in order to prevent or limit organizational impact.5 Triaging event artifacts
is the first step in an analysis process through which an organization recognizes that an incident is underway.In
the triage process, an organization determines how to categorize an event or series of events, how to evaluate
it, and whether the event reaches the threshold of a declarable incident. The threshold for when an incident
has occurred, is occurring, or is imminent and requires a response is unique to each organization and depends
on factors such as organizational structure, mission requirements, and laws and regulations. For example, a
technical disruption with a time-to-repair that exceeds the acceptable recovery time of a critical service may be
a threshold for declaring an incident. 

Once an organization recognizes an incident, it performs additional analysis to determine the appropriate
response. Analysis helps the organization better understand the incident, identify appropriate actions to contain
or prevent further impact from the incident, and recover and return to operations. Some organizations may
have already planned specific responses to previously considered incidents. In other cases, organizations may
need to collect input from all of the appropriate stakeholders to determine the best response. Stakeholders may
include asset owners, senior leadership, technical staff, and dedicated incident response staff.
Important activities in the triage and analysis include
• event categorization
• events prioritization
• event data correlation and analysis
• incident declaration
• incident analysis and response determination 


Responding to and recovering from an incident requires an organization to take actions to prevent or contain
the impact of an incident. This requires that organizational response be escalated to the stakeholders who are
best able to implement and manage the response and bring the incident to a close. The amount of resources and
level of effort required for the organizational response will vary with the extent of the incident and should be
informed by incident analysis. Appropriate responses can range from simply informing an asset owner of the
occurrence of an incident to implementing service continuity plans that require relocating services and
operations to a secondary location. Because there is a broad range of potential incidents, organizations must
consider a broad range of potential responses. Each organization’s unique operating environment determines
the appropriate response and should be used by the organization to set incident response performance
requirements. Examples of incident response performance requirements include response time frames for
incident types, cost per incident, time from event detection to event closure, and time from incident declaration
to stakeholder communication. Factors that influence an organization setting these requirements include
organizational mission, critical success factors, risk appetite, and current competitive environment.
Important practices in the Respond and Recover step include
• incident escalation to stakeholders
• response development and implementation
• incident status communication
• incident tracking 



Once an organization responds to an incident and its operations are no longer being disrupted, the organization
should conduct a post-incident review to consider the performance of its response activities. Organizations can
use this review to understand why an incident or series of incidents occurred and what the organization can do
prevent them in the future. The review should include all those who participated in the response and recovery
and the stakeholders whose assets were impacted by the incident. It should consider whether the response and
recovery were as effective and efficient as they could have or should have been. From a risk management point
of view, the organization can use the lessons learned from an incident to improve its protection and control
strategies and to optimize them with its business continuity and disaster recovery plans. As with the other
steps, the extent and effort required for the review depend on the impact of the incident and the organization’s
operating environment. Once the organization has completed its review, it is important that it close the
incident. Closing the incident is an official declaration that no further action on the incident needs to be taken.
Incident closure activities ensure that all of the stakeholders affected by the incident are notified that it has
been addressed, and they should not see any further effects.
Important practices in improving the incident management capability include
• root cause analysis
• incident closure 
