The purpose of situational awareness is to actively discover and analyze information related to immediate
operational stability and security and to coordinate such information across the enterprise to ensure that all
organizational units are performing under a common operating picture
Situational awareness provides an organization an understanding of its critical service’s operating environment
and the environment’s impact on the operation of the critical service. This understanding provides stakeholders
with a sufficiently accurate and up-to-date understanding of the past, current, and projected future state of a
critical service and supports effective decision making in the context of a common operating environment.
This includes understanding the assets and other services that affect or depend on the critical service. The
representation or picture of the state of a critical service (including the condition of its supporting assets, the
performance of its high-value physical and cyber processes, and events detected and responded to by its
physical and cybersecurity safeguards) is presented to stakeholders in the context of the threat environment
(internal and external) and the resulting risks to the critical service’s mission.

The situational awareness process establishes a common operating picture (COP) by collecting, fusing, and
analyzing data to support automated or human decisions about appropriate actions to prevent disruption of a
critical service or to restore the service to proper function. This COP is shared through timely communication
and presentation of the results of the data analysis to appropriate decision makers (people or machines) in a
form that aids human comprehension (e.g., using data visualization techniques, appropriate use of alarms) and
allows operators or other personnel to quickly grasp the key elements needed for good decision making. 

 Depending on how it is presented, a complete picture could present too much
information and overload a human decision maker. Operators should not be presented with a massive data
dump; rather, operators should see only what’s important, which is determined by the risk strategy and overall
risk picture

1. Obtaining support for situational awerness 

Obtaining support from management, in the form of resources (budget and staffing) and organizational
commitment, is essential to ensuring the situational awareness plan is effectively implemented. A top-down
approach can also help ensure the situational awareness program meets the resilience objectives of the
organization.
The level of management support required depends on the scope of the situational awareness program being
implemented. Senior-executive-level support is necessary for a situational awareness plan that addresses the
entire organization. Smaller implementations, such as those at the business unit or team levels, may require
sponsorship only from the management responsible for that particular organizational level.
Initially, situational awareness planning is usually iterative. As the other phases of the situational awareness
process are completed (data collection and analysis, communicating situational awareness information, and
improvement), the plan will need to be reviewed and revised. Eventually, situational awareness re-planning
may be done periodically. 


2. Establish situationa lawerness strategy
Establishing a high-level strategy that focuses on long-term goals can be the foundational activity for any
program. Establishing a strategy for situational awareness helps the organization develop a situational
awareness program that reflects the priorities of the enterprise, operating units, and specific critical services.
The following steps illustrate an approach for establishing the strategy for a situational awareness program.

A. Identify management directives and organizational priorities. Organizational priorities can be
articulated in many forms and help identify the strategic objectives. Strategic objectives are derived from
strategic planning activities, which usually forecast two to five years out.6 The following sources can
provide insight into management directives and organizational guidelines:
strategic plan—The document in which an organization defines its plans for achieving its mission,
where the organization wants to go, and how it plans on getting there. Large enterprises may have
strategic plans at multiple levels within the organization, such as the enterprise and operating-unit
levels. In this document, a plan refers to a set of activities, with associated assignments and resources,
that is designed to accomplish an objective. It is more detailed and has a shorter timeframe than a
strategy.
critical success factors (CSFs)—A small number of areas in which an organization must consistently
perform well to meet its goals and mission. CSFs illustrate what the organization considers its top
priorities in achieving its goals.
legal and regulatory obligations—Frequently sources of insight into requirements placed on the
organization by external entities.
internal policies and standards—Policies and procedures developed by the organization to promote
acceptable behaviors and practices.

B. Identify complementary strategies and plans that support and rely on situational awareness
activities. Such strategies and plans include, for example,
risk management
asset management
incident management
vulnerability management
service continuity management

C. Define and document situational awareness program objectives. Situational awareness program
objectives are derived from the management directives and organizational priorities identified above.

D. Prioritize situational awareness program objectives. Situational awareness program objectives should
be prioritized based on their potential to affect operational resilience.11 These priorities will help the
organization allocate resources.
The resources available to an organization for situational awareness will influence the selection of the
situational awareness program strategy, which should
focus on increasing the cyber resilience of critical services
align with the organization’s strategic objectives
The purpose of a situational awareness program is to identify specific activities that can implement and
support the situational awareness objectives. The following steps illustrate an approach for integrating
situational awareness objectives specific to cyber resilience in an existing situational awareness program:

i. To avoid redundancy, review the existing situational awareness program activities before
implementing new ones.
ii. Assess the effectiveness of existing situational awareness program activities, using sufficient
evidence. This review is often completed as a by-product of auditing or feedback and measurement
activities.
iii. Establish new situational awareness program activities to fill the gaps left by existing activities.
iv. Confirm that the proposed revised situational awareness program effectively meets all of its
objectives, and assign responsibility, typically to operating-unit managers, for implementing new
activities

Data for situational awerness usually comes from:
- vulnerability managment
- risk management
- audit logs
- service desk reports
- faults,incidents,alarms


4. eestablish an approach for communicating situational awerness information

The organization must communicate situational awareness information about events or threats that can
adversely impact the organization’s critical services. Frequently, this is accomplished by building a common
operational picture (COP). The COP provides a means of communicating threat information to stakeholders in
an appropriate and timely manner and serves as the basis for making good decisions and taking proper actions
Example methods include
• threat communication standards and guidelines
• standardized report templates
• communication escalation protocols
• communication channels (email, text, mobile phone, etc.)


5. Establish a situational awerness plan
A situational awareness plan describes how the organization will collect, analyze, and communicate situational
awareness information. The objectives of the plan are translated into specific activities assigned to individuals
or groups. A situational awareness plan should address
• the organization’s approach to situational awareness
• the structure of the situational awareness process
• the requirements and objectives of the situational awareness process
• a description of how the organization will collect, analyze, and communicate situational awareness
information
• the roles and responsibilities necessary to carry out the plan
• applicable training needs and requirements
• resources that will be required to meet plan objectives
• relevant costs and budgets associated with situational awareness activities

Situational awerness planing questions

Do we know which roles/positions need to be filled now?
Do we know which roles/positions we would like to have?
Do we have a good account of the team’s capabilities (skills, training)?
Do we have actual job descriptions for every role we need to establish?
Do we have training events/resources in our budget and on our calendar?Do we know which roles/positions need to be filled now?


Effective situational awareness depends on the timely collection of sufficiently accurate and inclusive riskrelevant data about the critical service (such as the condition of its supporting assets, the discovery of
vulnerabilities to which it would be susceptible, the performance of its high-value physical and cyber
processes, and the events detected by its physical and cybersecurity safeguards), the fusing of data from
multiple internal and external sources, and the analysis of data, which often includes modeling and simulation.
Done well, situational awareness improves stakeholders’ understanding of the past, current, and projected
future state of a critical service
